---
title: 'Fascism Anyone? 14 characteristics.'
date: 2025-03-10 12:00:00 -5
# published: false
image: fascism/1.jpg
tags:
---

A fascist is not just someone whose political opinions differ from yours. Such
generic labels are neither useful, nor accurate. But fascists and their regimes
often do have common characteristics that help identify them. 

<!-- excerpt -->
This list was compiled two decades ago by political scientist, Dr. Lawrence
Britt, after studying the fascist regimes of Hitler, Mussolini, Franco,
Suharto, and Pinochet. SOURCE: "American Fascism and God," Davidson Loehr,
Chelsea Green Publishing Co., 2005, pp. 78-70.  

For those interested in further understanding of fascism, two approachable
and brief summaries are "On Tyranny", by Timothy Snyder, and "How Fascism Works,"
by Jason Stanley.

**Fascist characteristic #1**

Powerful and continuing nationalism. Fascist regimes tend to make constant use
of patriotic mottos, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags
are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.

<img src="{{image}}" alt="American Fascism + God">

**Fascist characteristic #2**

Disdain for the recognition of human rights. Because of fear of enemies and the
need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human
rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to
look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions,
assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, and so on.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/2.jpg" alt="Fascism a Warning">

**Fascist characteristic #3**

Identification of enemies/scapegoats as a unifying cause.The people are rallied
into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common
threat or foe: racial, ethnic, or religious minorities; liberals; communists;
terrorists; and so on.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/3.jpg" alt="How Fascism Works">

**Fascist characteristic #4**

Supremacy of the military. Even when there are widespread domestic problems,
the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the
domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/4.jpg" alt="On Tyranny">

**Fascist characteristic #5**

Rampant sexism. The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost
exclusively male dominated. Under fascist regimes traditional gender roles are
made more rigid. Opposition to abortion is high, as are homophobia and antigay
legislation in national policy.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/5.jpg" alt="How Democracies Die">

**Fascist characteristic #6**

Controlled mass media. Sometimes the media are directly controlled by the
government, but in other cases, the media are indirectly controlled by
government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/6.jpg" alt="On Democracy">

**Fascist characteristic #7**

Obsession with national security. Fear is used as a motivational tool by the
government over the masses.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/7.jpg" alt="Behold, America">

**Fascist characteristic #8**

Religion and government are intertwined. Governments in fascist nations tend to
use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public
opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders,
even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the
government’s policies or actions.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/8.jpg" alt="Healing the Heart of Democracy">

**Fascist characteristic #9**

Corporate power is protected. The industrial and business aristocracies of a
fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power,
creating a mutually beneficial business-government relationship and power
elite.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/9.jpg" alt="Jesus and John Wayne">

**Fascist characteristic #10**

Labor power is suppressed. Because the organizing power of labor is the only
real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated
entirely, or are severely suppressed.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/10.jpg" alt="Preparing for War">

**Fascist characteristic #11**

Disdain for intellectuals and the arts. Fascist nations tend to promote and
tolerate open hostility toward higher education and academia. It is not
uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested.
Free expression in the arts is openly attacked, and governments often refuse to
fund the arts. 

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/11.jpg" alt="A More Perfect Union">

**Fascist characteristic #12**

Obsession with crime and punishment. Under fascist regimes, the police are
given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to
overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of
patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited
power in fascist nations.

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/12.jpg" alt="Decoding the Plan to Undo Democracy">

**Fascist characteristic #13**

Rampant cronyism and corruption. Fascist regimes almost always are governed by
groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions
and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from
accountability. It is not uncommon in racist regimes for national resources and
even treasures to be appropriated or even stolen outright by government
leaders. 

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/13.jpg" alt="With God on Our Side">

**Fascist characteristic #14**

Fraudulent elections. Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete
sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against, or even
assassination of, opposing candidates, use of legislation to control voting
numbers or political-district boundaries, and manipulation of the media.
Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control
elections. 

<img src="/assets/img/posts/2025/fascism/14.jpg" alt="The False White Gospel">

