---
title: 'Of all the sadness'
date: 2024-11-08 12:00:00 -5
# published: false
image: 2024/do_unto_others.jpg
tags:
---
Of all the sadness I’ve felt in this election cycle, one of the deepest has
been seeing close ties of friends and family unraveled by “political
correctness.”

Long ago I learned the wisdom in asking myself, “Would I rather be right, or
would I rather be in right relationship?” It’s a great question. And it matters
immensely.

<!-- excerpt -->
{% asset_img image 'mural' %}

Granted, sometimes the actions or beliefs of others may require distancing to
uphold your own sense of morality, or even protect your emotional or physical
safety. Boundaries are important. But the accounts I keep hearing this election
year aren’t like that.  

It’s instead that folks seem to value the views of politicians they likely
don’t know, and never will meet, over close relationships they’ve formed for
years. Really? That’s how little you value the long-time loves in their life?
My message to such folks is to consider that long after the political fires die
down, what remains will be the ashes of regret. Reconsider! 

And to those being shunned (on either side of the red/blue,
liberal/conservative divide) I’d say, It’s probably not about you, and you
probably don’t deserve it.

Shunning is one of the cruelest punishments, meted out by tribes throughout
history. My first counsel for those being shunned would be to leave the Welcome
sign on your door, signaling somehow that you’ve not given up on the
relationship. The current of time has a way of wearing down the roughest of
edges. 

But after awhile, when there’s no indication of repaired relationship, it would
be important to find acceptance elsewhere. We are all created as social
creatures. Moving on can serve two purposes. First, it defeats the key aim of
those who shun—to punish through isolation. And second, it opens the
possibility that you may find individuals and groups who value your uniqueness,
rather than being threatened by it. 

What I find as I keep peeling back the layers that lead to shunning is this
core belief: If you believe and act like me, I’ll accept and love you. This is
called a transactional relationship. The often-unstated corollary in the deal
is, “You must act and think this way, or I’ll stop loving you.” 

To some extent, I imagine there’s a degree of transaction in any human
relationship, but it goes out of bounds when one’s self-definition is
determined by how others define you. What if many, or all, your friends and
family were to abandon you? Do you then become a nonentity? 

Years ago I was greatly helped in answer to that question by reading Henri
Nouwen’s thoughts on “Our First Love.” 

Our True Self, he writes, is knowing that we are God’s beloved, “when somehow
you can claim that long before your father, your mother, your brother, your
sister…loved you and wounded you—long before that, you were held in an eternal
embrace.…The spiritual life starts at the moment that you can go beyond all of
the wounds and claim that there was a love that was perfect and unlimited, long
before that perfect love became reflected in the imperfect and limited,
conditional love of people. The spiritual life starts when you can dare to
claim the first love. “Love one another because I have loved you first.”  (John
4:19)

Nouwen’s remarks are a reminder to those who shun, and to those who are
shunned, that ALL are beloved of God, without exception. Which means we are all
family, now and always.

