---
title: Still...
date: 2024-05-28 12:00:00 -5
# published: false
image: 2024/burned_mary.jpg
tags:
---
Some thoughts I shared on Memorial Day at the nuclear weapons plant in Kansas city:

Still…

On this Memorial Day, here at the entrance of this Edifice of Apocalypse, we
choose life, even as we did more than a decade ago when this was a productive
bean field, and we stood before the earth movers to halt their un-natural
despoilment and destruction.
<!-- excerpt -->
<img src="{{image}}" alt="Burned Mary of Nagasaki">

More than 160 arrests have since been made as PeaceWorks and its peacemaker
allies have nonviolently “crossed the line” to witness of Life and Love,
insisting that the crime of trespass was not theirs. The ones who truly “cross
the line,” threatening humanity, they said, are those who manufacture weapons
of indiscriminate mass destruction.

Still… the drumbeat of nuclear war continues. For 75 years, Kansas City, in the
very heart of America, has been the very heart of the US nuclear arsenal, now
crafting 80 percent of the components needed for weapons of global destruction.
Millions may die with the use of even a few hundred of the some 12,000 weapons
in the world’s nuclear arsenals. The poet wrote of the world’s end “by fire or
by ice,” but nuclear weapons do both—killing outright with fiery mushroom
clouds, killing eventually with radiation poisoning and nuclear winter.
Hundreds of Kansas Citians have already been sickened or have died from
contaminants at the old Bannister plant—a plant now abandoned, yet “polluted
into perpetuity,” paved over like a scab that will never heal. “Downwinders,”
directly subjected to radiation from the thousands of nuclear tests globally,
add to the untold tally of death and disease—and each of us alive today may
have been impacted with cancer and other ailments in ways yet unknown.

Still… some 7,000 employees with an annual budget of a billion dollars are busy
“modernizing and refurbishing” the US nuclear arsenal, devising yet more
enhanced means of annihilation. And the earthmovers are once again on the move,
more than doubling the current 192-acre behemoth with an additional 245 acres—a
$3-billion-dollar project planned to add 2.5 million square feet and 1,000 new
employees in the next decade. It defies imagination, but make no mistake: it’s
very real.

Still… some of even the most staunch advocates of “nuclear deterrence” have
awakened to the futility of a “you wouldn’t dare” game of escalating bluff and
bluster. In 2007 four elder U.S. statesmen went public in the Wall Street
Journal to recant their early devotion to nuclear deterrence, saying that this
article of faith is no longer valid. These were the very architects of
deterrence—Kissinger and Schultz, Perry and Nunn, (secretaries of state, a
secretary of defense, and a senator), once known as The Four Horsemen of
Nuclear Apocalypse. But today, they have a totally different legacy—the Nuclear
Security Project. Working with partners around the world, the NSP (and I quote)
“seeks to galvanize global action to reduce urgent nuclear dangers and build
support for reducing reliance on nuclear weapons, ultimately ending them as a
threat to the world.”

Still… the Biblical vision of John the Revelator remains a grim warning—the
four Horsemen of the Apocalypse—conquest and war, pestilence and death. Each of
these four would be the grim outcome of a major nuclear exchange. John’s vision
became the closing chapter in that “Good Book” of Christian scripture, now so
twisted that many pray for tribulation and destruction to usher in their
personal salvation, raptured joyously into the arms of a loving Jesus as
millions “left behind” writhe in torment. 

Still… the true Spirit of Jesus, the peaceful one, and kindred spirits of all
description, lift up an alternative kin-dom of One-ness where each person, and
other kind, and the Good Earth itself, are cherished as sacred manifestations
of Life and of Love. This vision of the Beloved Community, a term popularized
by Dr. Martin Luther King,Jr., echoes the nonviolent message of Mahatma Gandhi,
Dorothy Day, Malala Yousafzai, and many other prophetic voices arising
worldwide. The biblical author of Deuteronomy said it clearly centuries ago: “I
have set before you this day life and death, blessings and curses. Choose
life.” ([Deuteronomy 30:19](https://www.biblegateway.com/verse/EN/Deuteronomy%2030%3A19))

Still… on this day of remembrance, we struggle to remain hopeful in our desire
to choose life, as division sunders our global community, and threatens our
beautiful planet. “May you live in interesting times,” some say. Is that a
blessing, or a curse?… Or maybe both, as we try to live into that creative
tension where we are stretched daily, yet not broken? 

So we have spoken up, and we have acted up, believing with Brother Martin that
ultimately “the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward
justice.” We can help that bending. 

Still… the questions remain: 

Can we yet, in hope believing, envision this bean field turned from
death-dealing, and restored to life-giving? 

Can we yet dare believe our world will release its suicidal grip on nuclear weapons? 

Can we yet stand together boldly on the right side of history? 

Let us, individually and collectively, lend our small weight toward the tipping
point of a world free of war and its weapons. 

In can be so. There are ultimate forces for good in this world, this cosmos,
we know not of, inviting us into creative partnership. 

So in this moment, may we, believing in Life and Love, simply be still.   —Jim Hannah
