---
title: Dirt-y movie
date: 2023-12-04 12:00:00 -5
# published: false
image: 2023/dirt-y-movie.jpg
tags:
---
I went to a dirt-y movie last night…and I highly recommend it!

Now that I’ve tweaked your prurient interest, maybe I should more accurately say:

I went to a soil-y movie last night.…and I highly recommend it!

<!-- excerpt -->
<img src="{{image}}" alt="human race">

It’s called “Common Ground,” coming soon to a theater near you. The movie digs
deep into the precious earth that sustains us. It calls for “regenerative
agriculture”—practices that restore the soil, rather than much of modern
agriculture that destroys it. 

The so-called “Green Revolution” (tilling the ground with modern machinery,
plus use of fertilizers, pesticides, and hybrid seeds) initially boosted food
production dramatically, but is increasingly a devolution as it turns rich soil
into depleted dust, which is then washed away by rain, or blown away by wind. 

The monocultures of soybeans and corn that have replaced nearly all the vast
prairie of the central US defy a core law of evolution evident throughout
Earth’s existence: diversity is essential to survival. My Irish ancestors
learned this lesson tragically when their monoculture of potatoes was wiped out
by a single mold that laid waste the harvest, led to social upheaval, and
resulted in the death of some 1.5 million souls. The same could happen to the
unnatural planting of beans-and-corn that dominates the American breadbasket.  

In addition to vulnerable monocultures, U.S. agribusiness today flies in the
face of Nature’s timeless wisdom in other reckless ways. Commercial fertilizers
contaminate watersheds and drinking water; pesticides indiscriminately kill
beneficial pollinators as well as so-called “pests;” antibiotics used in
livestock production create resistant strains of disease; ever-stronger toxic
herbicides are needed to kill increasingly resistant “weeds.” 

“Common Ground” lifts up hopeful and practical alternatives, some as simple as
preserving and enriching the soil by no-till planting and use of cover crops
such as clover—practices that prevent erosion, retain moisture, control weeds,
and increase fertility through adding organic matter.

I was much encouraged by the 400 or so who crowded the theater for the first
screening of “Common Ground” in Kansas City. The Q&A session afterwards with
the film’s advocates showed a growing awareness that a primary yield for farms
of the future will be sustainability. For those of us who are not farmers, we
can do our part by supporting farmer’s markets, buying organic produce,
reducing consumption of highly processed food, following a mostly plant-based
diet, and being more attentive to how our food choices impact the environment
and our health. 

I hope this film will receive the audience it deserves, and will help ground us
in the awareness that as the Earth goes, so go we. 

(If you’ve like a foretaste of “Common Ground” before its general release, you
can see its precursor on You Tube, “Kiss the Ground.” Narrated by Woody
Harrelson, it too urges regenerative agriculture, and offers actionable
alternatives through which we can express gratitude by learning to walk softly
on the face of Mother Earth.)


